[DOCS] Update osquery page for changes in 7.16 (#117031)
elastic/kibana: docs/osquery/osquery.asciidoc

[[osquery]]
= Osquery

https://osquery.io[Osquery] is an open source tool that lets you query operating systems like a database, providing you with visibility into your infrastructure and operating systems.
Using basic SQL commands, you can ask questions about devices, such as servers, 
Docker containers, and computers running Linux, macOS, or Windows.
The https://osquery.io/schema[extensive schema] helps with a variety of use cases,
including vulnerability detection, compliance monitoring, incident investigations, and more.  

With Osquery in {kib}, you can:

 * Run live queries for one or more agents

>  * Schedule queries to capture changes to OS state over time

Reviewer: Should we mention query packs here?

Author: Good suggestion! It now specifies `Schedule query packs` instead of just `Schedule queries`.

>  * Schedule queries to capture changes to OS state over time

Reviewer: do we want to add packs here?

[[osquery]]
= Osquery

https://osquery.io[Osquery] is an open source tool that lets you query operating systems like a database, providing you with visibility into your infrastructure and operating systems.
Using basic SQL commands, you can ask questions about devices, such as servers, 
Docker containers, and computers running Linux, macOS, or Windows.
The https://osquery.io/schema[extensive schema] helps with a variety of use cases,
including vulnerability detection, compliance monitoring, incident investigations, and more.  

With Osquery in {kib}, you can:

 * Run live queries for one or more agents
 * Schedule query packs to capture changes to OS state over time
 * View a history of past queries and their results

>  * Save queries and build a library of queries for specific use cases

Author: I think it's an important thing to note somewhere, because we've received some questions about it. But I definitely see your point. I'll try to find a better spot for it.

>  * Save queries and build a library of queries for specific use cases

Author: I ended up moving it to the "Osquery results" section - seems like a better fit there.

[role="screenshot"]
image::images/enter-query.png[Select saved query dropdown name showing query name and description]

. (Optional) Expand the **Advanced** section to view or set <<osquery-map-fields,mapped ECS fields>> included in the results from the live query.

. Click **Submit**.

. Review the results in a table, or navigate to *Discover* to dive deeper into the response,
or to the drag-and-drop *Lens* editor to create visualizations.
. To view more information about the request, such as failures, open the *Status* tab.
. To save the query for future use, click *Save for later* and define the ID,
description, and other <<osquery-manage-query,details>>. 

[float]
[[osquery-view-history]]
===  View or rerun previous live queries

From the *Live queries history* section on the *Live queries* tab:

* Click image:images/play-icon.png[Right-pointing triangle] to replay a query.

* Click image:images/table-icon.png[Table icon] to view the query <<osquery-results,results>> and <<osquery-status,status>>.
+
[role="screenshot"]
image::images/live-query-check-results.png[Results of OSquery]

[float]
[[osquery-schedule-query]]
== Schedule queries with packs

> Create packs to organize sets of queries. For example, you might create a pack that checks

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Create packs to organize sets of queries. For example, you might create one pack that checks
```

for IT compliance-type issues, and another pack that monitors for evidence of malware. 
You can schedule packs to run for one or more agent policies. When scheduled, queries in the pack are run at the set intervals for all agents in those policies. Scheduling packs is optional. 

. Open the **Packs** tab.

. Click **Add pack** to create a new pack, or click the name of an existing pack, then **Edit** to add queries to an existing pack.

. Provide the following fields:

* The name of the pack.

* A short description of the pack.

* The agent policies where this pack should run. If no agent policies are set, then the pack is not scheduled.

. Add queries to schedule:

* To add a query to the pack, click *Add query*, and then either add a saved query or enter a new query.
Each query must include a unique query ID and the interval at which it should run. 
Optionally, set the minimum Osquery version and platform,
or <<osquery-map-fields,map ECS fields>>. When you add a saved query to a pack, this adds a copy of the query. A connection is not maintained between saved queries and packs.

> * To upload queries from a .conf query pack, drag the pack to the drop zone under the query table. To explore the community packs that Osquery publishes, click *Example packs*.

Reviewer 2: should conf be in a different font: `.conf`?

Author: agreed - updated

image::images/scheduled-pack.png[Shows queries in the pack and details about each query, including the last time it ran, how many results were returned, the number of agents it ran against, and if there are errors]

. View scheduled query results in <<discover,*Discover*>> or the drag-and-drop <<lens,*Lens*>> editor.

[float]
[[osquery-manage-query]]
== Edit saved queries

Add or edit saved queries from the *Saved queries* tab.

. Go to the saved queries, then click **Add saved query** or the edit icon.
. Provide the following fields:

* The unique identifier.

* A brief description.

* The SQL query.

* The <<osquery-map-fields,ECS fields>> to populate when the query is run. These fields are also copied in when you add this query to a pack.

* The defaults to set when you add the query to a pack.

** The frequency to run the query.

** The minimum https://github.com/osquery/osquery/releases)[version of Osquery] required to run the query.

** The operating system required to run the query. For information about supported platforms per table, refer to the https://osquery.io/schema[Osquery schema].

. Click *Test configuration* to test the query and any mapped fields: 

> * From the *Test query* panel, select agents or groups to test the query, then click *Submit*. This runs a live query. Result columns that are mapped are marked with image:images/mapped-icon.png[mapping icon]. Hover over the icon to see the mapped ECS field.

Reviewer 2: The period after to icon wraps to the next line.  Not sure how to fix other than to remove a word.  You could do "then click *Submit* to run a live query.

Author: @gchaps - did the update commit fix what you were seeing? Thanks!

[role="screenshot"]
image::images/enter-query.png[Select saved query dropdown name showing query name and description]

. (Optional) Expand the **Advanced** section to view or set <<osquery-map-fields,mapped ECS fields>>. The results from the live query include the mapped fields.

. Click **Submit**.

. Review the results in a table, or navigate to *Discover* to dive deeper into the response,
or to the drag-and-drop *Lens* editor to create visualizations.
. To view more information about the request, such as failures, open the *Status* tab.
. To optionally save the query for future use, click *Save for later* and define the ID,
description, and other <<osquery-manage-query,details>>. 

> To view a history of the past queries you have run, open the *Live queries history*.

Author: I ended up making it an independent sub-section, because I think it's a bit of a separate process from running a live query. Take a look and let me know whether you think the latest update works.

. Click **Save query**.

[float]
[[osquery-map-fields]]
== Map result fields to ECS

When you save queries or add queries to a pack, you can optionally map osquery results or static values to fields in
the {ecs-ref}/ecs-reference.html[Elastic Common Schema] (ECS),
which standardizes your Osquery data for use across detections, machine learning,
and any other areas that rely on ECS-compliant data.
When the query is run, the results include the original `osquery.<fields>`
and the mapped ECS fields. For example, if you update a query to map `osquery.name` to `user.name`, the query results include both fields. 

. Edit saved queries or queries in a pack to map fields:

* For *Saved queries*: Open the *Saved queries* tab, and then click the edit icon for the query that you want to map.

* For *Packs*: Open the *Packs* tab, edit a pack, and then click the edit icon for the query that you want to map.

. In the **ECS mapping** section, select an **ECS field** to map. 

. In the **Value** column, use the dropdown on the left to choose what type of value to map to the ECS field: 

> ** **Osquery value**: Select an Osquery field. The fields available are based on the SQL query entered, and only include fields that the query returns. When the query runs, the ECS field is set dynamically to the value of the osquery field selected.

Reviewer 2: osquery field selected > Osquery field selected?

** **Static value**: Enter a static value. When the query runs, the ECS field is set to the value entered. For example, static fields can be used to apply `tags` or your preferred `event.category` to the query results. 

. Map more fields, as needed.

** To add a new row for additional fields to map, click the plus icon.

** To remove any mapped rows, click the trash icon.

. Save your changes.

> Note:

Reviewer 2: Use our NOTE format.  Instructions are [here](https://github.com/elastic/docs#admonition-paragraphs).

** Some ECS fields are restricted and cannot be mapped. These are not available in the ECS dropdown.

** Some ECS fields are restricted to a set of allowed values, like {ecs-ref}/ecs-event.html#field-event-category[event.category]. Use the {ecs-ref}/ecs-field-reference.html[ECS Field Reference] for help when mapping fields. 

> ** Osquery date fields have a variety of data types (including integer, text, or bigint). When mapping an Osquery date field to an ECS date field, you may need to use SQL operators in the query to get an {es}-compatible 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
** Osquery date fields have a variety of data types (including integer, text, or bigint). When mapping an Osquery date field to an ECS date field, you might need to use SQL operators in the query to get an {es}-compatible 
```

> {es-ref}/date.html[date] type. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
{ref}/date.html[date] type. 
```

Reviewer 2: stopped here

* The SQL query.

* The <<osquery-map-fields,ECS fields>> to populate when the query is run. These fields are also copied in when you add this query to a pack.

* The defaults to set when you add the query to a pack.

** The frequency to run the query.

** The minimum https://github.com/osquery/osquery/releases)[version of Osquery] required to run the query.

** The operating system required to run the query. For information about supported platforms per table, refer to the https://osquery.io/schema[Osquery schema].

. Click *Test configuration* to test the query and any mapped fields: 

* From the *Test query* panel, select agents or groups to test the query, then click *Submit*. This runs a live query for those selected. Result columns that are mapped are marked with image:images/mapped-icon.png[mapping icon]. Hover over the icon to see the mapped ECS field.

. Click **Save query**.

[float]
[[osquery-extended-tables]]

> == Extended tables for Kubernetes queries

Author: @aleksmaus - ++ on James' question. Any input on this section would be great.

I'd also love to add some table descriptions here, if possible. Do you happen to know where we could pull those from?

Also, to confirm: Will the [field reference in our readme](https://github.com/elastic/integrations/tree/master/packages/osquery_manager) be updated with fields for each of the new tables? (`host_users`, `host_groups`, and `host_processes`)

> == Extended tables for Kubernetes queries

Reviewer 3: @melissaburpo the readme is updated with these new tables and the fields.
The initial PR for this feature has some more description
https://github.com/elastic/beats/pull/28434
and the link to the original github issue.

> == Extended tables for Kubernetes queries

Author: Thanks @aleksmaus, I've updated the PR to add this paragraph per our conversation over slack:

> When querying these tables, the expectation is that the `/etc/passwd`, `/etc/group`, and `/proc` are available in the container under `/hostfs` as: `/hostfs/etc/passwd`, `/hostfs/etc/group`, and `/hostfs/proc`. For information about the fields available in these tables, see the https://docs.elastic.co/en/integrations/osquery_manager#exported-fields[exported fields] reference.

[[osquery-results]]
== Osquery results

> To see a list of the Osquery fields that can be returned in query results,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For a list of the Osquery fields that can be returned in query results,
```

refer to https://docs.elastic.co/en/integrations/osquery_manager#exported-fields[exported fields].
Query results can also include ECS fields, if the query has a defined ECS mapping.

Osquery responses include the following information:

* Everything prefaced with `osquery.` is part of the query response. These fields are not mapped to ECS by default.

> * Results include some ECS fields by default, like `host.*` and `agent.*`, that provide information about the host that was queried.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Results include some ECS fields by default, such as `host.*` and `agent.*`, which provide information about the host that was queried.
```

and ARM64 architecture on Linux.

NOTE: The original {filebeat-ref}/filebeat-module-osquery.html[Filebeat Osquery module]
and the https://docs.elastic.co/en/integrations/osquery[Osquery]
integration collect logs from self-managed Osquery deployments.
The *Osquery Manager* integration manages Osquery deployments
and supports running and scheduling queries from {kib}.

[float]
=== Customize Osquery sub-feature privileges

Depending on your https://www.elastic.co/subscriptions[subscription level],
you can further customize the sub-feature privileges
for *Osquery Manager*. These include options to grant specific access for running live queries,
running saved queries, saving queries, and scheduling packs. For example,
you can create roles for users who can only run live or saved queries, but who cannot save or schedule queries.
This is useful for teams who need in-depth and detailed control.

[float]
=== Customize Osquery configuration

> By default, all Osquery Manager integrations share the same osquery configuration. However, you can customize how osquery is configured by editing the Osquery Manager integration for each agent policy

Reviewer 2: osquery is lowercase here.  Is that ok?

Author: I decided to just be consistent throughout and use caps in all instances.

you want to adjust. The custom configuration is then applied to all agents in the policy. 

> This is an incredibly powerful feature, because it allows you to configure

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This powerful feature allows you to configure
```

> things like https://osquery.readthedocs.io/en/stable/deployment/file-integrity-monitoring[File Integrity Monitoring], https://osquery.readthedocs.io/en/stable/deployment/process-auditing[Process auditing], 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
https://osquery.readthedocs.io/en/stable/deployment/file-integrity-monitoring[File Integrity Monitoring], https://osquery.readthedocs.io/en/stable/deployment/process-auditing[Process auditing], 
```

and https://osquery.readthedocs.io/en/stable/deployment/configuration/#configuration-specification[others].

> NOTE: Take caution when editing this configuration. The changes you make are distributed to all agents in the policy.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
IMPORTANT: Take caution when editing this configuration. The changes you make are distributed to all agents in the policy.
```

. From the {kib} main menu, click *Fleet*, then the *Agent policies* tab.

. Click the name of the agent policy where you want to adjust the Osquery configuration. The configuration changes you make only apply to the policy you select.

> . Click the name of the Osquery Manager integration, or add the integration first if the agent policy does not yet have it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. Click the name of the *Osquery Manager* integration, or add the integration first if the agent policy does not yet have it.
```

. From the *Edit Osquery Manager integration* page, expand the *Advanced* section.

. Edit the *Osquery config* JSON field to apply your preferred Osquery configuration. Note the following:

* The field may already have content if you have scheduled packs for this agent policy. To keep these packs scheduled, do not edit the `packs` section.

* Refer to the https://osquery.readthedocs.io/en/stable/[Osquery documentation] for configuration options. 

* Some fields are protected and cannot be set. A warning is displayed with details about which fields should be removed.

> * (Optional) To load a full configuration file, drag and drop an osquery `.conf` file into the area at the bottom of the page.

Reviewer 2: osquery lower case?
